# Solutions of Lecture 2

1. Read [`man ls`](https://www.man7.org/linux/man-pages/man1/ls.1.html) and write an `ls` command that lists files in the following manner

   - Includes all files, including hidden files
   - Sizes are listed in human readable format (e.g. 454M instead of 454279954)
   - Files are ordered by recency
   - Output is colorized

   A sample output would look like this

   ```bash
   -rw-r--r--   1 user group 1.1M Jan 14 09:53 baz
   drwxr-xr-x   5 user group  160 Jan 14 09:53 .
   -rw-r--r--   1 user group  514 Jan 14 06:42 bar
   -rw-r--r--   1 user group 106M Jan 13 12:12 foo
   drwx------+ 47 user group 1.5K Jan 12 18:08 ..
   ```

   **Solution:**

   ```bash
   ls -lath --color=auto
   ```

   

2. Write bash functions `marco` and `polo` that do the following.
   Whenever you execute `marco` the current working directory should be saved in some manner, then when you execute `polo`, no matter what directory you are in, `polo` should `cd` you back to the directory where you executed `marco`.
   For ease of debugging you can write the code in a file `marco.sh` and (re)load the definitions to your shell by executing `source marco.sh`.

   **Solution:**

   ```bash
   marco() {
      export MARCO=$(pwd)
   }
   
   polo() {
      cd "$MARCO"
   }
   ```

   
   
3. Say you have a command that fails rarely. In order to debug it you need to capture its output but it can be time consuming to get a failure run.
   Write a bash script that runs the following script until it fails and captures its standard output and error streams to files and prints everything at the end.
   Bonus points if you can also report how many runs it took for the script to fail.

   ```bash
   #!/usr/bin/env bash
   
   n=$(( RANDOM % 100 ))
   
   if [[ n -eq 42 ]]; then
      echo "Something went wrong"
      >&2 echo "The error was using magic numbers"
      exit 1
   fi
   
   echo "Everything went according to plan"
   ```

   **Solution:**

   ```bash
   #!/usr/bin/env bash
   
   count=0
   until [[ "$?" -ne 0 ]];
   do
      count=$(( count + 1 ))
      ./random.sh &> out.txt
   done
   
   echo "found error after $count runs"
   cat out.txt
   ```

   
   
4. As we covered in the lecture `find`'s `-exec` can be very powerful for performing operations over the files we are searching for.
   However, what if we want to do something with **all** the files, like creating a zip file?
   As you have seen so far commands will take input from both arguments and STDIN.
   When piping commands, we are connecting STDOUT to STDIN, but some commands like `tar` take inputs from arguments.
   To bridge this disconnect there's the [`xargs`](https://www.man7.org/linux/man-pages/man1/xargs.1.html) command which will execute a command using STDIN as arguments.
   For example `ls | xargs rm` will delete the files in the current directory.

   Your task is to write a command that recursively finds all HTML files in the folder and makes a zip with them. Note that your command should work even if the files have spaces (hint: check `-d` flag for `xargs`)

   **Solution:** (on MacOS)

   ```bash
   find . -type f -name "*.html" -print0 | xargs -0 tar -cvzf archive.tar.gz
   ```

   
   
5. (Advanced) Write a command or script to recursively find the most recently modified file in a directory. More generally, can you list all files by recency?

   **Solution:** (on MacOS)

   Find the most recently modified file.

   ```bash
   find . -type f -print0 | xargs -0 stat -f "%m %N" | sort -rn | head -1 | cut -d' ' -f2-
   ```

   List all files by recency.

   ```bash
   find . -type f -print0 | xargs -0 stat -f "%m %N" | sort -rn | cut -d' ' -f2-
   ```

